Then I went to live with the relatives in Ammanford who kept the big, but I didn't like it there.
I missed my brothers and sisters wanting to go home, and it was only in Ammanford, which is not very far.
And then I came home and eventually, you know, I was allowed to do wall work.
And was that in the local factory?
Actually no, we had to travel to Bridgend, you know, with the bus and the train and hundreds to go to the Royal Ordnance Factory, making different things.
But eventually I became a fitter.
And during the war I went to a training centre in Newport and came back and I was allowed to join the Union, Engineering Union, which was another dog really, you know, with men in the engineering.
That's another tale.
Yes, you said you were from a very large family. Can you tell me again how many there was?
Well, the eldest sister died and I had three other sisters and two brothers.
And you said your uncle and auntie had quite a few children as well.
Yes, yes.
There were big families around us all in the street, you know.
There was the Morganses and the Jameses, you know.
We were the biggest family I think in that street then.
But there we are. We all mucked in and did things.
I remember my sister getting married on a boxing day.
And my father and mother were glad that she was getting married because she was working in Cardiff, you see, and Cardiff was being bombed.
And there we are.
The only time that we were in a street, you know, was when a plane dropped some bombs on the drink and we mucked it then, you know.
But between this village and the next village there was an army post.
And before you crossed over the bridge, you know, you had to be a few walking then, you know, buses would go.
But I used to go to Brecon because it felt safer somehow, I would say.
My husband and I then, no, my boyfriend, he was then, he would cast the bus.
I think I spent a lot of time looking around the cathedral and did things because my mother then didn't like me going to Swansea at all in case of the bombing.
Can you describe your street and the river behind your house?
The canal.
Yes, well, that canal had been there for years, it's no longer there.
They did the bypass on it eventually.
But, well, the canal was a way of life there, you know, kids used to play there.
And then behind that there was another little stream and that was more or less coming from the muddyn which was cleaner than the canal.
But people used to do a lot of things in the canal, they used to throw their water, you know, and a lot of things.
And they used to say that you weren't a member of the street until you had fallen into the canal.
You were christened in the canal sort of thing, you know.
And then the canal, canal bank, where a lot of people used to walk on a Sunday evening after chapel.
It was a venue like, you know, you saw these couples and families and things.
And then the house coming down the steps and into the house and then the street and across the street the gardens.
And everybody in the street did their gardens, you know, just to grow things.
And an uncle of mine had built big greenhouses and used to grow tomatoes and things like that.
Because, you know, they say chicken is very popular now.
Well, chicken was popular in our house then because that was a way of eating out the rations and things.
During the war anyway.
And then I even ate goat's meat.
Because when the goats used to have tins, I don't know, I remember giving it to my husband when he didn't know what meat to eat.
And then, oh, when he had that, it was goat meat, it was modified.
But rabbits we used to, you know, have.
Because men used to go shooting and trapping and things.
But every Christmas there was a goose, of course.
And no turkeys then.
And as I say, my father used to grow onions.
Oh gosh.
And there was snuggler shawls, you know, photographed there somewhere, my uncle and with these big huge onions.
And Sunnybrook Shawl was a big venue then.
And that's how we lived back then.
Then when I started work in the RF factory in Bridgend, I hated going out in the morning in the dark.
My brother was the only one who used to get up and take me to the bus sometimes.
Because I hated the dark.
And then my other brother used to come and meet me sometimes.
But we survived.
You told me the story earlier on of your family keeping animals.
Yes.
Can you tell me again about that?
About keeping?
Your family kept animals?
Oh yes.
Well, it was, we kept animals.
We kept them, it was like a plank, you know, a big long thing to cross.
And on the other side of the canal there was all sheds then.
And that's where they kept the chickens, the geese were there.
My aunt even had a donkey.
And he used to be dressed up for the carnival, you know.
And an old man, another gentleman living on the other side of the canal, used to dress a cart up and he'd go to the carnival with the donkey.
But that all finished with the war, you see.
And after that it was never the same, was it?
When I was coating with my husband and he was in the mines, but he also had to do fire watching and things, you know.
When I used to work shift or whatever, perhaps he was, the only time we used to meet, he'd come down by the last bus when I was after noon.
And he'd come home by the 11th or 12th.
He'd meet me and walk up and go to the house then.
We'd have his lowers there and then he'd walk up the canal bank then all the way back to other cranes.
Because, you know, as I say, it was the miners who were working six days a week then.
And I was working seven days a week sometimes.
Different shifts and things.
But I remember my youngest, my brother then, he was only 14.
And he wanted to join up, I think, or 15, something like that.
When I got home one afternoon, Tom was in the house and my mother said he's gone.
He wanted to join up.
Infusia related with Dite.
He went down to try and join a ship in the Saunday Docks.
And they were bobbing, of course.
They were bobbing and he was under this table in this seaman's place somewhere.
Mother Solie remembers, he's having a big mug of tea under the table of this place.
And he could hardly lift the mug. He was saying it was so heavy.
But he came home anyway and he never joined up.
The experience put him up.
No, I don't think so.
My mother didn't want him to go anywhere.
My mother had died and I remember him then.
He wanted to join the Palestinian police.
And he sent away.
My mother knew the envelope she was to burn.
She just didn't want him to go.
If we go back to Joseph Herman, can you describe to me how you first met him?
It was in this pentagon.
And I had been asked to go and help out with Ben and Katie.
They were kept in the pub.
And Katie had broken her ankle, I think it was.
And they were looking.
So I went to help.
And that's how I knew of him there before.
Because as I say, my cousin was doing the washing and things.
And my mother, my cousin, were very, very friendly.
And she used to help out with them.
And that's how I got really to know him there in the pentagon.
And I hadn't, I had seen her but I had never spoken to her.
I became more used to her when she moved from the pentagon to the street where I lived.
And then they had done the studio.
And when I worked with him, I knew him.
Used to come and stand outside the bar in Pentagon.
And he was funny, you know, saying different things.
And that's the time after a while he asked, could you paint my portrait?
And I was very impressed.
And my mother told my mother, my mother said, yes.
And then of course when we went to, she said, you know, how old I was.
And was I a virgin?
And my mother told my mother, my mother said, no way, leave it there.
And I think he was, his way of asking, you know, what I was and who I was then.
But no, I didn't find him, as I say, he was a bit flamboyant, you know.
And he was walking about in his cape and you would see him coming in the distance, you know.
And then you used to see him and he used to like crossing the canal, you know, and going up.
But other than him, he used to go towards where the mines were that way then.
I've seen him sat on the bridge where the bridge is in Estragon Lice now and sat there waiting for the miners to come home, you know, that way.
But I think she would like to go up to what we call the patches, you know, and to do a little bit of sketching that way.
I did see one or two things that she had done, you know, different to him and all his friends.
And she had a cape and a camaschanto and things and she looked different to the people of the village.
She talked to anyone, and children especially.
She had a good rapport with her son.
Yes, yes.
And she used to, I'm thinking of the festival of St. Joshua, which was, there was like a festival with us,
and like carnival type thing, and people were dressing up and she dressed my son.
She had this whiskwood from somewhere and a fez on his head and coloured him a bit with something and striped pyjama bottoms and a thick,
she put a few beads on his slippers or something like that and he went and rolled a carpet into his hand.
There is a photo of the attic somewhere of him.
He wasn't very old, you know, but there is a photo of him by the wall by wherever we lived then.
And she was more inclined to, I think, get involved with the, than he was, but he talked to anybody or anything, you know.
And a lot of the miners thought a lot of him, you know, because he was so ordinary like that with them.
And by then a lot of the elders used to think that because he built that, they had that big wall built around the studio, as they called it,
what's going to go on there, you know, and then, oh, is he a communist, you know, and things like that.
In a way it was sharp when they went, you know, because the studio was empty then for a while, you know, until Peggy and I came.
And they were big friends of his and through that Peggy Ray got involved with them and Diana, Thomas John and a lot of others.
They were big settler friends in the village, I think.
And as I say, I knew the lady, Mrs. Galley, and I was told that there was a portrait of her in the nude, you know, partly in the nude.
And they would talk that she was pregnant at the time, I think, you know.
I never saw the portrait, but there was, I remember this woman living in the street and she had had a new baby.
And I have seen that photo.
Sorry if I just...
Right, just to recap.
Yes.
And I don't know what else to say.
I thought, you know, quite ordinary people.
And I knew, when we had heard, that she was a wealthy woman.
And she never gave us that impression at all, you know.
But my mother used to say, you know, and my cousin with them, once they moved to the studio, I don't think my cousin, somebody else then, as a maid with them, I remember who she was.
And, my mother used to say, you know, they can't have got much money, look, you know, because of the bedding and things like that.
But that's the way they lived, isn't it?
Like I believe we have a lifestyle like that.
Can you describe the bedding?
Well, it was red, just ordinary, but it was red and a red tablecloth and, you know, I don't think it's so, but I remember the bedding more than anything.
And as I say, it was wartime and everything was white with everybody else then, you know.
But this was red, red pillow pieces.
That's what I remember mainly, then, you know, my mother saying, no, Bob, you want red pillow pieces, but, you know, that's their way, I suppose.
And she did have a pet hen in this place in Pennebont, and my cousin's husband, the hen wasn't well, you know, and he had to go away with it down the little cage that they had.
And I remember him saying, but if she had fed it up a bit, then she would have had a nice meal out of it, but I don't think they would have wanted to eat this hen because it was more of a, like a pet with them.
Whether it was a special breed or what, I don't know, but I remember my cousin's husband saying about the hen that he was called because the hen.
And I thought that was really funny that somebody had a pet hen because we had plenty of hens where we lived and nobody would have time to because it was a show to feed them and clean the sheds out and things.
We talk about the red sheets. What did, what were people's first reactions to it?
Well, as I say, my mother was, my cousin, my cousin, took it in a straight, I think, and then my mother told me and I went to see, you know, these red pillow pieces and things.
They think it on, but I had never seen red sheets before or red pillow pieces. But whether she had died them, she had had them died, I don't know, but they were bright red.
But as I say, she dressed differently to anybody else in the village. She had beautiful boots, you know, and things. And his cape and tamarshankam and him and his cape and his little Popeye hat. It was quite dapper.
You said that your mother thought the red sheets most symbolized them, I think.
Yeah, yeah. Well, as I say, my mother thought he was a communist. And then when they built the big walls around it, you know, a lot of the elderly people in the street were saying, but you want that big wall for, you know, they want it, they got to Hyde and things like that.
But they accepted it in the end, you know. And my mother, always, you know, she'd pass and she'd say good morning or he'd say, you know, or raise his hand and, you know, a way he went with his easel under his arm and things.
Yes, he tried to fit in then, you know. In the end, people never used to think, you know, but he was a bit of a mystery when he came first.
And how he came, I think it was to do with Peggy and I, they are friends in Lendensie and they were local and they must have brought them down this way. I never had the proper story with Peggy, how they, but it became, in the end, of course, Peggy lived in the studio for years after that.
That's how Betty has got it now because they were related. If Peggy was alive, she could tell you more, much more, I expect. Now Dinah, she would know more because they were so friendly.
I can't say I was ever that friendly with them, but I remember him well and I remember the time in Pennabont. Once they went to the studio and, you know, eventually I got married and then I came back to the street to live and then she, now there's Mrs. Gallagher,
she fought after the war to have a children's clinic and they got, and I think, well, she did more than he did, got involved that way with the locality then.
I remember, you know, Mrs. Gallagher, and I remember going with a poster on the pram, you know, to try and get the first baby clinic in the Stringerland after the war.
But they were very friendly. The house around the corner, there was a big house and they used to go there quite a lot. But there again, Mrs. Gallagher and her husband, they talked. Well, Mrs. Gallagher was more or less local, but he was.
And he was Scottish, Mr. Gallagher, so maybe they got friendly that way, you see, because she was Scottish.
I have, you know, Dinah has told us one or two things when we're in company, how they met and how they, you know, and his life and no doubt she helped him because she had money and, you know, he had nothing and that started him off right, more or less.
I should think so anyway, because until he became more well known then, you know, then they left and went back to London. We used to, yeah, setting things about them, you know, found out that they had parted, you know, and divorced and things.
But I think she still carried a torch for him, you know, from what I can gather. But I have seen his wife then, you know, but I've never spoken of my husband.
Do you think that Joseph captured the essence of this together, the people and the industry?
Well, I think he concentrated more on the mining aspect of the Strygonite. As I say, I remember him taking a picture and I seen that. She's nursing a child Welsh-fusher, like, you know, on the doorstep and things.
But he was very interested in it, to the point that he went and he went to go underground and, you know, back to the, in the Skiing and Collering, watched them coming.
As I say, my brother was, you know, and he was coming home from night shift. You'd see him going and he had been up early watching the men going to work and watching them coming back because I think he was more fascinated with the mining of the area and the miners themselves.
He used to go into the pub and have a chat with them and capture them, you know, smoking and things like that. But as I say at first, I didn't like the way he was portraying the miners because they didn't resemble the miners to me as I knew them, you know.
But then that's the way he saw them, you know. And you could see there, sometimes I used to think, oh, he does look bad and does look ill in that one, you know, because they were suffering, some of them then, with the chest problems and things.
Can you describe what, if you started from one end of Astigan Lice and walked through the town to the other side, can you describe what you would see and the people you would meet?
Oh, they were very friendly at that time, you know. Everybody knew everybody else. And Welfare Hall, they had dances and dramas and operas.
The big Male Voice Choir was a huge success, a band, a silver band. And very often when Male Voice had a concert, you had to go weeks ahead to have a ticket, I think.
And then the Historia Cinema, it was a wonderful cinema, beautiful films and things like that. But I'm afraid it's vastly different now. There wasn't so many houses, you know.
And then they, after the war, they built the local factory, the Tik Tok, as they called it. Well, that became a way of life for them, yeah. There were so many people working there.
And it was something new to the village because the young men didn't have to go to the mines, they could have an apprenticeship in the local factories and things.
There was one, and then there was Perry Chain, as they called it, in Calan, in Tabont, just up the road. And that brought prosperity that way to them.
But I would say that all villages, they say, you know, there's a lot of people come in to live to this area. Whereas before, as I say, you knew everybody.
I could walk into any house in the street, you know, and you knew, you know, nobody would ask you what you want or anything like that. And where I lived in the street, there was a lot of relatives, aunts and uncles and cousins, living all along the street.
If anybody was barred, well, you know, you knew you'd have support and sympathy. It's not like that now.
It was like that when Joseph came at first, because, as I say, everybody knew everybody in the street and the surrounding. Because it's odd where we lived. There was two public houses in the street, the miners and the star.
And then down the bottom of the street, there was the unischeduling house, which is still around. And then around the corner, where they made their first home, the Pennebots.
Well, there was three chapels around us at the time, the Tabernacles, Sardis, Anina, the Baptists, Methodists, and an independent chapel. And that was the way of life then.
The river. Kids used to swim and play in the river. There were no swimming pools or anything then. And it was a treat to go to the beach in Swansea or Pothkul or somewhere, you know.
I remember one time, I don't know whether it was some relative of Joseph's wife then, and there was a big car came into the village and they were saying that somebody, a relative of hers or something.
And that caused a stir. And a lot of people were saying, why didn't he, after the war and things, more cars were on the road. Funny that old Joseph hasn't got the car, they used to say.
But he didn't think of it that way. As I say, there were plenty of buses. Buses, well, the road is closed now, around the Skedwin Arms that way. There was an open road all the way down to the Guernas.
They closed the canal then and did a bike pass then, behind where I lived, in the street there. So he must have seen a lot of changes while he was here, because he was here during the war then.
That's about all.
And you said the bus used to go through your street?
Pardon?
You said the bus used to go through your street?
No, not at the bottom of the street.
Bottom of the street.
Bottom of the street. But he used to work around the corner and up to Cungier, you know, every hour practically. But the bus is going now.
And he would jump on the bus and go anywhere. And never used to go to Swansea during the war much. Only to Brecken and the like. We considered it safer to go up that way than down to Swansea.
When I used to like, well, we went married then to go to the Empire in Swansea where they had live shows. Remember, see, Vera Linda. Then we used to catch the train in St. Thomas and come back up to Rosalvera and walk then, you know, perhaps if there was no bus or something.
And this night, I forget, we had been to see. And when we got into the train, the air raid, the train was blacked out in the station, it was moving. When I got home, it was very late. I remember that my brother was at the bottom of the street waiting for us.
Then my husband was told in all certain terms that he wanted to take me again down to Swansea. That's the life we had, you see. We were better off than millions.
But I think the time they spent amongst the Western people, I think, Joseph and I enjoyed themselves. It became like, you know, anyone else then. At first, of course, they were a talking point.
Why have they chosen us to come like that? You know, and things like that. And as I say, when they off the studio, the old pop factory brought.
And then it became, after the pop, it became during the war, a food distribution, you know, like a warehouse. I remember them, some local men worked at them. And then when it was finished, they did, you know, it was all right.
And then I did go to a studio once, and I thought it was wonderful, you know, the way they handled it. But I sat in the garden with them, with her then especially, and she used to open it up and have children there to play.
And she used to give them poppies. And I remember one time she put a magic show on for the children. And then, that's the way they lived.
Do you know why they decided to move back to London?
No, no, I didn't know. I can't really say. They were all wondering what would happen. And then, of course, Peggy and I came to live in the studio. And they were very, very friendly with us.
How they became friends, I don't know. But they were in London at one time as well, you see, you know. And they never had any children, so.
And it was the first time my mother ever said how she felt after being married. And I always remember her telling me that when you lose a husband, yes, you lose a partner.
When you lose a child, you lose part of the interest. And then, apparently, my sister was a very, how can I say, she liked going to church and chapel.
And an aunt of mine was an apostolic. And she used to take ladies with her. And she'd get up and sing at that age, you know. And my mother used to say, oh, she was too good for this world. That's why she went like that.
And I remember my mother saying that they had been talking outside somewhere. And she, I think, she told that she had buried a little girl, you know.
And it's not long ago we put a headstone different to what was there because the church, and it's so old. And, you know, I was saying how.
But as I say, with Mrs. Herman, I think she knew more about the people in the street than maybe he did because she used to, you know.
Although, as I say, he'd talk to anybody. Or wherever you were, you know, he'd find something to it. And I know he used to love going to the public houses and seeing the men how they were and things.
And there was quite a few characters in the area as well.
Your mother must have felt very comfortable with Katie to tell her about your daughter.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Yeah, and I think by asking me what he did ask then, you know, maybe he wanted to know more about me then, you know.
And so that, as you say, he could make his own thoughts about how to portray.
But I do remember that time in the Cardiff, Stedford.
And I went in and to the, where all the pictures were shown around there.
I remember someone asking, when was this, when, you know, about Joseph's and saying, a woman saying, they don't look like miners to me, you know.
And I did say, well, I happen to know him, you know, I said. That's how he saw the miners.
And from a distance, I think, you know, close up was to think, but then seeing them in frames and things like that, you had a different perspective on it.
But at first, I never thought much of this.
But I've seen books and things since, you know, and you could see how he saw the miners.
When I think of a miner, I think of him in a, you know, hard hat with the lamp and things like that.
There we are. That's it. Another era gone.
I was sorry to see them go, you know, because, as I say, they became part of life.
They fitted in then.
Maybe it's of some help to you.